.TH MU2EDAQ\-DISKWATCHER 1 "March 2026" "mu2edaq-diskwatcher 1.1.0" "Mu2e DAQ Utilities"
.SH NAME
mu2edaq\-diskwatcher \- file modification-time monitor with embedded web dashboard
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-host\fR \fIADDR\fR]
[\fB\-\-port\fR \fIPORT\fR]
[\fB\-\-poll\-interval\fR \fISECONDS\fR]
[\fB\-\-daemon\fR]
[\fB\-\-pid\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-log\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-version\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher
monitors the modification times of files and directories listed in a YAML
configuration file.
A background thread periodically calls
.BR os.path.getmtime (2)
on each configured path.
If the time elapsed since the last modification exceeds the staleness
threshold specified for that path, the entry is flagged as
.IR stale .
.PP
An embedded Flask web server serves a Bootstrap dashboard at
.BR http://\fIhost\fR:\fIport\fR/ .
The dashboard displays a table of all watched paths, their last modification
times, the time elapsed since modification, the configured threshold, and a
colour-coded status badge
.RB ( ok " in green or " stale " in red)."
The browser refreshes the table automatically by polling the
.B /api/status
JSON endpoint at a user-selectable interval (default: 10 s).
.PP
An
.B About
page at
.B /about
shows runtime information (hostname, platform, Python version, uptime),
the active configuration (config file path, bind address, poll interval,
files watched, run mode), and the versions of Python dependencies.
.PP
The program may optionally be run as a POSIX background daemon (see
.BR \-\-daemon ).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
YAML configuration file to load.
Defaults to
.B diskwatcher.yaml
in the current directory.
If the flag is supplied explicitly and the file does not exist,
the program exits with an error.
If the flag is omitted and the default file is absent, built-in defaults
are used and a warning is printed.
.TP
.BR \-\-host " " \fIADDR\fR
Network address to bind the web server to.
Overrides
.B watcher.web_host
from the config file.
Default:
.BR 0.0.0.0 .
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-port " " \fIPORT\fR
TCP port for the web server.
Overrides
.B watcher.web_port
from the config file.
Default:
.BR 5002 .
.TP
.BR \-\-poll\-interval " " \fISECONDS\fR
Number of seconds between mtime checks.
Overrides
.B watcher.poll_interval
from the config file.
Default:
.BR 30 .
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-daemon
Detach from the terminal and run as a background daemon using the POSIX
double-fork technique.
stdin is closed, stdout and stderr are redirected to
.B \-\-log\-file
(or
.I /dev/null
if not specified).
Not supported on Windows.
Overrides
.B watcher.daemon
from the config file.
.TP
.BR \-\-pid\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Write the daemon process ID to
.I FILE
immediately after daemonizing.
The file is removed automatically when the process exits cleanly.
Overrides
.B watcher.pid_file
from the config file.
.TP
.BR \-\-log\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Redirect daemon stdout and stderr to
.IR FILE ,
opened in append mode so that successive runs accumulate in the same log.
Has no effect unless
.B \-\-daemon
(or
.BR watcher.daemon: " true)"
is set.
Overrides
.B watcher.log_file
from the config file.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the program version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a short help message and exit.
.SH DAEMON MODE
When started with
.B \-\-daemon
(or
.B watcher.daemon: true
in the config file), the program uses the standard POSIX double-fork idiom
to detach completely from the controlling terminal:
.IP 1. 3
The process forks; the parent exits so the shell regains its prompt.
.IP 2.
The child calls
.BR setsid (2)
to start a new session and become its leader.
.IP 3.
The child forks again; the session leader exits.
The grandchild process can never re-acquire a controlling terminal.
.PP
After daemonizing, stdin is redirected from
.IR /dev/null .
stdout and stderr are redirected to the file named by
.B \-\-log\-file
(appended), or to
.I /dev/null
if no log file is configured.
.PP
A PID file is written when
.B \-\-pid\-file
is given; it is removed when the daemon exits cleanly.
To stop a running daemon:
.PP
.RS
.B kill $(cat /tmp/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.pid)
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The configuration file uses YAML syntax and has three top-level sections:
.BR watcher ,
.BR files ,
and
.BR paths .
.SS watcher
Controls the server and polling behaviour.
.TP
.B web_host
Bind address for the embedded web server (default:
.BR 0.0.0.0 ).
.TP
.B web_port
TCP port for the embedded web server (default:
.BR 5002 ).
.TP
.B poll_interval
Seconds between successive mtime checks of all watched paths (default:
.BR 30 ).
.TP
.B daemon
Boolean.
Set to
.B true
to run as a background daemon (default:
.BR false ).
.TP
.B pid_file
Path to the PID file written when daemon mode is active.
Optional; no PID file is written if omitted.
.TP
.B log_file
Path to the log file that receives stdout/stderr when daemon mode is active.
If omitted, output is discarded to
.IR /dev/null .
.SS files
A YAML sequence of file entries.
Each entry is a mapping with the following keys:
.TP
.B path
.RI ( required )
Absolute or relative filesystem path to the file.
.TP
.B delay
Staleness threshold in seconds.
If the file has not been written within this many seconds it is shown as
.BR stale .
Default:
.BR 300 .
.TP
.B label
Human-readable name shown in the dashboard instead of the raw path.
Optional; defaults to the path itself.
.SS paths
A YAML sequence of directory entries with the same keys as
.BR files .
The mtime of a directory reflects when its contents (the directory entry
itself) last changed, i.e., when files were added or removed.
To detect writes
.I inside
a directory, list the individual files in the
.B files
section instead.
.SH YAML FORMAT
.nf
watcher:
  web_host:      "0.0.0.0"
  web_port:      5002
  poll_interval: 30
  daemon:        false
  pid_file:      "/tmp/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.pid"
  log_file:      "/tmp/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.log"

files:
  - path:  /data/mu2e/run_001.dat
    delay: 120
    label: "Run 001 data"
  - path:  /var/log/artdaq.log
    delay: 60

paths:
  - path:  /data/mu2e
    delay: 300
    label: "Data directory"
.fi
.PP
Bare string entries (without a mapping) are also accepted; they use the
default delay of 300 seconds and the path as the label:
.nf

files:
  - /tmp/heartbeat.txt
.fi
.SH WEB ENDPOINTS
.TP
.B GET /
Main dashboard page showing the file status table.
.TP
.B GET /about
About page with runtime and configuration details.
.TP
.B GET /api/status
JSON endpoint returning the current status of all watched paths.
The response object contains:
.RS
.TP
.B total
Total number of configured paths.
.TP
.B ok
Number of paths whose age is within their threshold.
.TP
.B stale
Number of paths whose age exceeds their threshold (or that are inaccessible).
.TP
.B poll_interval
Active poll interval in seconds.
.TP
.B files
Array of per-path status objects, each containing
.BR path ", " label ", " delay ", " mtime ", " mtime_str ", "
.BR age_s ", " age_str ", " delay_str ", " stale ", and " error .
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.B diskwatcher.yaml
Default configuration file, searched for in the current working directory.
.TP
.B /tmp/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.pid
Default PID file location when
.B watcher.daemon
is true and
.B watcher.pid_file
is not overridden.
.TP
.B /tmp/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.log
Default log file location when
.B watcher.daemon
is true and
.B watcher.log_file
is not overridden.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start with the default configuration file in the current directory:
.PP
.RS
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher
.RE
.PP
Start with a specific configuration file and a non-default port:
.PP
.RS
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher \-\-config /etc/mu2e/diskwatcher.yaml \-\-port 8080
.RE
.PP
Override the poll interval from the command line:
.PP
.RS
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher \-\-poll\-interval 10
.RE
.PP
Bind the dashboard to localhost only:
.PP
.RS
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher \-\-host 127.0.0.1
.RE
.PP
Start as a background daemon with a log file and PID file:
.PP
.RS
.B mu2edaq\-diskwatcher \-\-daemon \-\-log\-file /var/log/diskwatcher.log \-\-pid\-file /tmp/diskwatcher.pid
.RE
.PP
Stop a running daemon:
.PP
.RS
.B kill $(cat /tmp/diskwatcher.pid)
.RE
.PP
Enable daemon mode via the config file (no CLI flag needed):
.PP
.RS
.nf
# diskwatcher.yaml
watcher:
  daemon:   true
  pid_file: /tmp/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.pid
  log_file: /var/log/mu2edaq-diskwatcher.log
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mu2edaq\-dashboard (1),
.BR stat (1),
.BR find (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Mu2e DAQ Group, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory.
